---
title: Introduction to Complex Network
date: 2019-07-09
tags: [complex system, network]
categories: course notes
---



# Motivation

## Objectives

- network perspective on complex systems

- examples for complex networks

## Questions
- what does the complex networks perspective add to the study of complex systems?
	- [Try] a more related and global analysis perspective?
- What is the difference between the network perspective and the agent-based modeling approach?
	- [Try] network: global, agent-based: local.
	- Wrong. See below.
- Describe the micro and macro perspective on complex networks. What distinguishes them?
	- [Try] micro: **individual**, on one node/edge, e.g. the degree of one node; macro: **systemic properties**, e.g.  the number of nodes/edges, more general, doesn't cover the detail of the individual compoenent in the network. The information's object distinguish them, whether the information is used to describe a single component.
- Give two examples for complex systems that can be studied from a network perspective.
	- [Try] academic author citation situation; the spread of virus.
- Consider an example for a complex system: what is the micro-and the macro level?
	- [Try] author citation network. micro: the citation number of each paper, macro: the distribution of the citation number.
- Define three macroscopic features of networks and use them to classify the example networks of this lecture
	- [Try] the degree distribution, the density, the direction. The component coefficient.
- Give two examples for link semantics that result in undirected and directed links.
	- [Try] directed: <a,b>, undirected: (a,b)

## Keywords
- agent-based modeling
- complex network basic conceptions
- network observations
- Micro/Macro perspective

## Agent-based modeling
||Agent-based modeling|network perspective|
|---|----------|----------|
|Focus|Internal dynamics of agents, e.g how agent make decisions|Topology|
|Show Format| group, mean field, etc|Nodes and links|
|More| Feedback between agent dynamics and interactions| dyadic interactions|

There is no hard separation between these two approaches.

## Complex Systems

- a large number of **subsystems** -> can be reduced
- agents/subsystems **strongly** interacte with each other.

### complex network

an **abstract graphical** representation of complex system.



## Micro-Macro

the micro-macro link: relate **microscopic** details of a model to the **macroscopic** features of the system that it will generate (and vice-versa).

Usage:

- explain large-scale patterns of the system based on microscopic behavior.
- design microscopic behavior to achieve desirable systemic properties.

## Examples

- technology systems: e.g. computer network (Internet), power grid infrastructure

- social systems: friendship, communication, scientific community

  | Category          | Nodes                | Links           | Examples                                               |
  | ----------------- | -------------------- | --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
  | Technology system | engineered artifacts | transport lines | computer network (internet), power grid infrastructure |
  | Social system| actors|social ties| friendship, communication, scientific community, hierarchy relationships|
  | Information system| knowledge artifact| semantic relations| scholarly citations|
  |biological system|biological entities|biological interactions| gene regulartory network|
  |economic system|actors|interactions|financial transaction, trade relation|
  
## Obervations of network
|Perspective| Detail|
|----------|---------------|
| structure| regular, random, complex|
|connectedness| closely connected, diameter|
| heterogeneity|degree distribution|
